>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, NOVEMBER, 2: A NEW
CLIMATE CHANGE REPORT WARNS OF
IRREVERSIBLE DAMAGE UNLESS
FOSSIL FUELS ARE PHASED OUT.
HOW DEMOCRATS AND REPUBLICANS
ARE USING TECHNOLOGY TO TRY
TO TURN OUT THE VOTE TUESDAY.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
BRITTANY MAYNARD, THE YOUNG
WOMAN WITH TERMINAL BRAIN
CANCER, HAS GONE TO OREGON TO
GET THE MEDICATION SHE NEEDS TO
DIE.
>> I WILL DIE UPSTAIRS IN MY
BEDROOM THAT I SHARE WITH MY
HUSBAND WITH MY MOTHER AND MY
HUSBAND BY MY SIDE.
>> Sreenivasan: WE'LL LOOK AT
HOW THE ASSISTED SUICIDE LAW
THERE WORKS.
AND A BOSTON EXHIBIT CELEBRATING
THE WORKS OF ALEXANDER CALDER.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE UNITED NATIONS WARNED TODAY
THAT THE WORLD MUST GET MOST OF
ITS ENERGY FROM RENEWABLE
SOURCES BY 2050 OR INCREASE THE
LIKELIHOOD OF WHAT IT CALLED
SEVERE, PERVASIVE AND
IRREVERSIBLE DAMAGE.
A REPORT PRODUCED BY HUNDREDS OF
SCIENTISTS AROUND THE WORLD SAID
INACTION ULTIMATELY WOULD PROVE
MUCH MORE EXPENSIVE THAN
SWITCHING OVER TO RENEWABLES.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
ISSUED THIS STATEMENT IN
RESPONSE:
AND THERE WAS THIS FROM UN
SECRETARY GENERAL BAN KI MOON:
ISIS FIGHTERS IN IRAQ REPORTEDLY
HAVE COMMITTED ANOTHER MASSACRE.
OFFICIALS SAY THE SUNNI
EXTREMISTS LINED UP AND EXECUTED
AT LEAST 50 PEOPLE TODAY IN A
VILLAGE WEST OF BAGHDAD.
OFFICIALS SAID THE VICTIMS
REPORTEDLY INCLUDING SIX WOMEN
AND FOUR CHILDREN, WERE
ASSEMBLED, THEN SHOT ONE BY ONE
IN PUBLIC.
IT WAS THE THIRD INCIDENT OF ITS
KIND IN THE PAST SEVERAL DAYS.
IT'S ESTIMATED THAT AS MANY AS
320 PEOPLE HAVE BEEN KILLED.
THERE WERE ALSO FATAL BOMBINGS
TODAY IN AND AROUND BAGHDAD.
THESE ARE IMAGES FROM THE
AFTERMATH OF A CAR BOMBING THAT
KILLED AT LEAST 14 PEOPLE AND
WOUNDED DOZENS MORE.
THE VICTIMS WERE SHIITE
PILGRIMS.
IN THE WEST BANK TODAY, NEW
CLASHES BETWEEN PALESTINIANS AND
ISRAELI SECURITY FORCES
FOLLOWING ISRAEL'S DECISION
EARLIER IN THE WEEK TO LIMIT
ACCESS TO A SACRED RELIGIOUS
SITE IN JERUSALEM.
MUSLIMS KNOW IT AS THE NOBLE
SANCTUARY, THE PLACE THE PROPHET
MOHAMMAD IS SAID TO HAVE
ASCENDED TO HEAVEN.
THE AREA IS KNOWN BY JEWS AS THE
TEMPLE MOUNT.
IT'S WHERE TWO ANCIENT TEMPLES
ONCE STOOD AND IS CONSIDERED THE
HOLIEST SITE IN JUDAISM.
TODAY, ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU ISSUED THIS
STATEMENT:
>> (translated): IT IS VERY
EASY TO IGNITE A RELIGIOUS FIRE
BUT MUCH HARDER TO EXTINGUISH
IT, THESE MESSAGES HAVE BEEN
RELAYED IN THE SHARPEST WAY
POSSIBLE TO MAHMOUD ABBAS AND
ALL ELEMENTS.
WHAT IS NEEDED NOW IS CALM.
>> Sreenivasan: VIOLENCE IN
ANOTHER PART OF THE WORLD TODAY.
A GROUP LINKED TO THE TALIBAN
HAS CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY FOR A
SUICIDE CAR BOMBING THAT KILLED
AT LEAST 45 PEOPLE AND WOUNDED
AT LEAST 70 MORE NEAR A MILITARY
CHECKPOINT IN PAKISTAN.
THE EXPLOSION OCCURRED JUST 500
YARDS FROM PAKISTAN'S WAGAGH
BORDER WITH INDIA, RIGHT AFTER A
DAILY CEREMONY WHEN BOTH SIDES
LOWER THEIR FLAGS
SIMULTANEOUSLY, AN EVENT OFTEN
WITNESSED BY HUNDREDS OF
TOURISTS.
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN NEARLY
FOUR YEARS, THE AVERAGE PRICE OF
A GALLON OF REGULAR GAS IN THIS
COUNTRY HAS SLIPPED BELOW THREE
DOLLARS A GALLON.
THIS, ACCORDING TO AAA.
SOME EXPERTS BELIEVE GAS PRICES
COULD GO EVEN LOWER.
IT MEANS MILLIONS OF AMERICANS
WILL HAVE MORE TO SPEND AS THE
HOLIDAY SHOPPING SEASON
APPROACHES.
A KENYAN MAN AND A KENYAN WOMAN
WERE THE TOP FINISHERS IN THE
NEW YORK CITY MARATHON TODAY.
WILSON KIPSANG WON THE MEN'S
DIVISION IN JUST UNDER TWO HOURS
AND 11 MINUTES, MARY KEITANY
COVERED THE SAME DISTANCE IN
JUST LONGER THAN TWO HOURS AND
25 MINUTES.
AND FOR THE SECOND YEAR IN A
ROW, AMERICAN TATYANA MCFADDEN
WON THE WOMEN'S WHEELCHAIR
DIVISION.
SHE ALSO WON THE MARATHONS THIS
YEAR AND LAST IN BOSTON, LONDON
AND CHICAGO, COMPLETING BACK-TO-
BACK GRAND SLAMS.
SHE WAS BORN WITH SPINA BIFIDA
AND PARALYZED FROM THE WAIST
DOWN.
WHEN SHE WAS SIX, SHE WAS
ADOPTED FROM A RUSSIAN ORPHANAGE
BY AN AMERICAN FAMILY.
MORE THAN 50,000 PARTICIPATED IN
TODAY'S RACE IN COLD AND WINDY
CONDITIONS.
MUCH OF THE ANALYSIS AFTER THE
2012 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION
FOCUSED ON HOW THE OBAMA
CAMPAIGN HAD MADE BETTER USE OF
TECHNOLOGY THAN THE ROMNEY
CAMPAIGN TO GET ITS SUPPORTERS
TO THE POLLS.
TONIGHT, WE LOOK AT WHAT BOTH
MAJOR PARTIES ARE DOING THIS
TIME AROUND IN THE DAYS LEADING
UP TO TUESDAY'S MID-TERM
ELECTIONS.
ASHLEY PARKER CO-AUTHORED AN
ARTICLE THIS WEEKEND IN THE "NEW
YORK TIMES" AND JOINS US NOW
FROM WASHINGTON.
SO THERE SEEMS TO BE
ADVANTAGE GOES BETWEEN ONE PARTY
TO ANOTHER PARTY GIVEN WHICH
ELECTION CYCLE AND THERE'S A
GAME OF CATCH-UP THAT HAPPENS.
>> YEAH, ABSOLUTELY AND THIS
TIME REPUBLICANS ARE DEFINITELY
PLAYING CATCH-UP.
THE OBAMA CAMPAIGN GAVE
REPUBLICANS CATCH-UP IN 2008 AND
2012.
THE ROMNEY TEAM DIDN'T MAKE AS
MUCH OF THEIR DIGITAL TEAM,
THEY'RE ACTUALLY TAKING A LOT OF
PAGES NOT SURPRISINGLY THE OBAMA
PLAY BOOK.
>> SO GIVE US AN EXAMPLE OF HOW
DIGITAL ADVERTISING CAN BE
TARGETED VERSUS A TELEVISION
SPOT.
>> SURE.
WELL ON TELEVISION YOU PLACE
YOUR ADS ON A TV SHOW DURING THE
COMMERCIAL BREAK.
SO FOR INSTANCE IF YOU PLACE ADS
ON ABC SCANDAL BECAUSE YOU WANT
TO REACH FEMALE VIEWERS YOU GET
FEMALE VIEWERS AND YOU MAYBE GET
MALE VIEWERS, OR MALE VIEWERS
WHO ARE FORCED TO WATCH THE SHOW
WITH THEIR GIRLFRIENDS BUT WITH
THIS WAY YOU CAN FOCUS ON A
DEVICE, IT FOLLOWS THEM WHEN
THEY ARE THERE.
WHEN THEY'RE LOOKING AT THEIR
PHONE WHEN THEY'RE WAKING UP YOU
CAN SERVE THEM AN AD, NOT ONLY
THE AT HOME BUT IF YOU ARE
SERVING THEM AN AD ON THEIR
TABLET YOU CAN TARGET THEM WHEN
THEY'RE ON THEIR WAY TO WORK, ON
THEIR WAY HOME, IN THE KITCHEN
COOKING DINNER WHEN THEY'RE AT
HOME.
>> DUE TO FACEBOOK ARE THEY
SELLING THE PREFERENCES WE ARE
EXHIBITING AND TELLING THEM
ABOUT?
>> YES, THEY ABSOLUTELY ARE.
FACEBOOK FOR INSTANCE OFFERS A
MENU OF OPTIONS, A CAMPAIGN
COULD TARGET FEMALE USERS OF
FACEBOOK OR CERTAIN ZIP CODE ON
FACEBOOK OR USERS WHO LIKE
CERTAIN FACEBOOK PAGES, RACHEL
MADDOW, OR EUROPE LIFT ITS FILE,
TARGET TO GET OUT AND VOTE AND
THEY CAN LITERALLY SERVE ADS TO
ALL THOSE EXACT PEOPLE WHO ARE
USERS OF FACEBOOK.
>> OKAY, SO HOW MUCH MONEY ARE
WE TALKING ABOUT CAMPAIGN
SPENDING IN THE GRAND SCHEME OF
THINGS?
IS MORE OF IT SHIFTING TO
DIGITAL TO TARGETING LIKE THIS?
>> YEAH, SO YOU KNOW, EACH CYCLE
IS SEEING A LARGER PORTION OF
THE OVERALL BUDGET GOING TO
DIGITAL, FOR INSTANCE, SOME
GROUPS THAT ENSURE DIGITAL GETS
A FAIR SHAKE, 15 OR 20% OF IT
GOES TO A DIGITAL BUY BUT
COMPARED TO TELEVISION IT'S
STILL A VERY SMALL PORTION.
SO IT'S INCREASING RAPIDLY BUT
TELEVISION IS SORT OF THE 800
POUND GORILLA.
>> ASHLEY PARKER, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
OUR ORIGINAL IN-DEPTH REPORTS
FROM AROUND THE NATION AND THE
WORLD.
YOU'VE PROBABLY SEEN PORTIONS OF
THIS STATEMENT THAT BRITTANY
MAYNARD POSTED ONLINE NEARLY A
MONTH AGO.
>> I HOPE TO ENJOY HOWEVER MANY
DAYS I HAVE LEFT ON THIS
BEAUTIFUL EARTH AND SPEND AS
MUCH OF IT OUTSIDE AS I CAN
SURROUNDED BY THOSE I LOVE.
I HOPE TO PASS IN PEACE.
>> Sreenivasan: MAYNARD, OF
COURSE, IS THE 29-YEAR-OLD
CALIFORNIA WOMAN WHO MOVED TO
OREGON RECENTLY BECAUSE THAT
STATE PERMITS ASSISTED SUICIDE.
MAYNARD WANTS TO DIE BEFORE HER
MALIGNANT BRAIN TUMOR LEAVES HER
COMPLETELY INCAPACITATED.
HER CASE, WHICH HAS REKINDLED A
NATIONAL DEBATE ABOUT ASSISTED
SUICIDE, GIVES US THE
OPPORTUNITY TO TAKE A LOOK AT
HOW OREGON'S LAW HAS BEEN
WORKING.
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: LIKE MILLIONS OF
AMERICANS, OREGONIAN PAM WALD
WAS RIVETED BY THE VIDEO OF
BRITTANY MAYNARD, A 29-YEAR-OLD
WOMAN SUFFERING FROM BRAIN
CANCER WHO MOVED HERE TO END HER
OWN LIFE.
>> I LOOKED AT THAT VIDEO.
I STUDIED, ESPECIALLY THE LAST
TIME I SAW THAT VIDEO, I DON'T
THINK I LEFT HER EYES.
>> Reporter: MAYNARD LIVED IN
CALIFORNIA BUT RELOCATED TO TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF OREGON'S DEATH WITH
DIGNITY LAW THAT PERMITS WHAT'S
COMMONLY KNOWN AS PHYSICIAN
ASSISTED SUICIDE.
>> I WILL DIE UPSTAIRS IN MY
BEDROOM THAT I SHARE WITH MY
HUSBAND, WITH MY MOTHER AND MY
HUSBAND BY MY SIDE.
>> Reporter: SHE WAS FEATURED IN
A MEDIA CAMPAIGN BY A GROUP
CALLED COMPASSION AND CHOICES,
TWENTY YEARS EARLIER, ITS
PREDECESSOR GROUP PLAYED A KEY
ROLE IN ADVOCATING FOR OREGON'S
FIRST-IN-THE-NATION RIGHT-TO-DIE
BILL.
IN 1994, PAM WALD CONSIDERED
HERSELF A SUPPORTER OF OREGON'S
DEATH WITH DIGNITY ACT.
SO YOU VOTED FOR IT, BUT YOU
NEVER THOUGHT, THIS HAS TO DO
WITH ME.
>> NO, NO.
IT WAS KIND OF LIKE OUT OF
COMPASSION.
THE IDEA THAT, YOU KNOW, SOMEONE
GETS IN THIS SITUATION, THEY
DESERVE A RIGHT, YOU KNOW, TO
CHOOSE.
YOU KNOW, IT'S IMPORTANT TO
CHOOSE HOW WE LIVE OUR LIVES AND
HOW WE DIE.
>> Reporter: BUT THEN YOU FOUND
YOURSELF IN THIS SITUATION.
>> YES.
>> Reporter: WHERE YOU... WHERE
IT'S, NOW IT'S THE STORY'S ABOUT
YOU.
>> YEAH.
THIS IS MY HUSBAND.
>> Reporter: IN 2011, PAM'S
HUSBAND OF 43 YEARS, BEN WALD,
DISCOVERED AN EARLIER BOUT OF
CANCER HAD RETURNED, SOON AFTER,
THE DISEASE BEGAN TAKING A
LETHAL TOLL.
PAM AND DAUGHTER BONNIE WATCHED
AS THE ONCE ROBUST BEN RAPIDLY
LOST WEIGHT.
AS THE CANCER SPREAD TO HIS
BONES, THE PAIN BECAME
INTOLERABLE.
>> BEN WOKE ME UP IN THE MIDDLE
OF THE NIGHT AND HE SAID, PAM,
WE GOTTA TALK.
I DON'T WANT TO KEEP, YOU KNOW,
I'M DYING, PAM.
I'VE HAD A GOOD LIFE WITH YOU
AND BONNIE.
I REALLY DON'T WANT TO JUST KEEP
LIVING LIKE THIS.
I WANT TO EXPLORE OREGON'S DEATH
WITH DIGNITY LAW.
>> Reporter: UNDER OREGON'S LAW,
A DOCTOR MUST DETERMINE A
TERMINALLY ILL PATIENT HAS SIX
MONTHS OR FEWER TO LIVE.
THE PHYSICIAN CAN WRITE A LIFE
ENDING PRESCRIPTION ONLY AFTER A
SECOND DOCTOR SIGNS ON AND BOTH
AGREE THE PATIENT IS OF SOUND
MIND.
THE PATIENT MUST REQUEST THE
DRUG AGAIN 15 DAYS AFTER THE
INITIAL REQUEST.
BUT ONCE THE PATIENT HAS IT, THE
DOCTORS' ROLE IS OVER.
SINCE THE LAW WENT INTO EFFECT
IN 1997, NEARLY 1,200 PEOPLE
HAVE RECEIVED LIFE-ENDING
PRESCRIPTIONS, BUT JUST 752 HAVE
ACTUALLY TAKEN THEM AND DIED.
OTHERS DIED SOONER AND SOME
CHANGED THEIR MINDS.
AS BEN'S HEALTH DETERIORATED, HE
AND PAM SOUGHT HELP FROM
COMPASSION AND CHOICES, THE
GROUP SUPPORTING BRITTANY
MAYNARD.
IN 2012, THE GROUP CONNECTED
THEM WITH TWO DOCTORS WHO SIGNED
OFF ON BEN'S WISHES.
>> MONDAY, BEN GOT THE ORDER FOR
THE PRESCRIPTION SO IT MEANT WE
COULD PICK IT UP ON WEDNESDAY.
AND I THOUGHT AT THAT POINT WE
WOULD HAVE IT AND THEN WE WOULD
JUST KIND OF SEE.
I THOUGHT I HAD MORE TIME WITH
HIM.
BUT HE SAID TO ME, "PAM, I WANT
TO TAKE IT ON FRIDAY OF THAT
WEEK."
>> Reporter: PORTLAND PHYSICIAN
BILL TOFFLER HAS ALSO FOLLOWED
THE CASE OF BRITTANY MAYNARD
BRITTANY'S STORY STRIKES A CHORD
WITH HIM, TOO.
TOFFLER'S WIFE OF 40 YEARS WAS
DIAGNOSED WITH CANCER IN 2009.
WE WERE BLESSED WITH FIVE YEARS
AFTER THE DIAGNOSIS WAS MADE.
AND SHE DIED JUST FOUR AND A
HALF MONTHS AGO.
>> Reporter: FOR DR. TOFFLER AND
HIS WIFE, ASSISTED SUICIDE WAS
NEVER AN OPTION.
HE LEADS A GROUP, PHYSICIANS FOR
COMPASSIONATE CARE EDUCATION
FOUNDATION, THAT OPPOSES
PRESCRIBING LETHAL DRUGS TO
TERMINAL PATIENTS.
EVERY DAY WE LIVED DIFFERENTLY
BECAUSE WE KNEW THAT WE HAD A
LIMITED AMOUNT OF TIME IN A WAY
THAT I NEVER PERCEIVED BEFORE I
HAD A WIFE WHAT THAT CLEAR
DIAGNOSIS.
AND I'D HOPE PATIENTS RECOGNIZE
THAT I VALUE THEM AS A DOCTOR,
REGARDLESS OF HOW DISABLED THEY
ARE, REGARDLESS OF HOW SICK THEY
ARE, THAT THEIR LIFE STILL HAS
MEANING AND VALUE.
AND I WANT TO REFLECT THAT, EVEN
WHEN THEY DON'T SEE IT
THEMSELVES.
>> Reporter: BUT WHAT ABOUT THE
FEAR AND THE PAIN THAT CAN
SURROUND DYING?
WHY NOT HELP, I ASKED DR.
TOFFLER, IF A PATIENT ASKS?
IT IS A VERY SCARY TIME.
AND AT THAT TIME, I WANT TO COME
AROUND THE PERSON.
I WANT TO WALK ALONGSIDE THEM.
I WANT TO BE THE BEST DOCTOR I
CAN BE.
I'M CALLED TO BE MORE OF A
DOCTOR THAN EVER.
I'M NOT SUPPOSED TO BE THE
PERSON WHO HELPS HER TO KILL
HERSELF.
THAT'S ALL TOO EASY.
IN A POLICY OPINION, THE
AMERICAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION
SAYS PHYSICIAN ASSISTED SUICIDE
IS FUNDAMENTALLY INCOMPATIBLE
WITH THE PHYSICIAN'S ROLE AS
HEALER.
AND SOME RELIGIOUS GROUPS, MOST
NOTABLY THE U.S. CONFERENCE OF
CATHOLIC BISHOPS, HAVE STRONGLY
OPPOSED THE PRACTICE.
ACCORDING TO THE GALLUP POLLING
ORGANIZATION, A SLIM MAJORITY OF
AMERICANS SUPPORTS ASSISTED
SUICIDE, BUT IT'S ONLY LEGAL IN
THREE STATES-- OREGON, OF
COURSE, ALONG WITH WASHINGTON
AND VERMONT.
AND COURT DECISIONS HAVE OPENED
THE DOOR FOR ASSISTED SUICIDE IN
NEW MEXICO AND MONTANA.
BIO-ETHICIST ARTHUR CAPLAN, WHO
WAS AN OPPONENT OF THE PRACTICE
BUT NOW SUPPORTS IT, SAYS THE
TERMS OF THE DEBATE HAVEN'T
REALLY CHANGED OVER THE PAST 20
YEARS, EVEN WITH THE PUBLICITY
SURROUNDING BRITTANY MAYNARD'S
CASE.
>> I THINK WHAT'S DIFFERENT IN
THIS DEBATE IS THAT BRITTANY
MAYNARD IS 29, ATTRACTIVE,
ARTICULATE, ALMOST-- PASSIONATE
ABOUT HER RIGHT TO CHOOSE HERE.
THAT'S MAKING THE DEBATE FOCUS
FOR A GROUP THAT DIDN'T PAY
ATTENTION, YOUNGER PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: CAPLAN SAYS FEARS
OF FIGURES LIKE DR. JACK
KEVORKIAN HELPED DERAIL THE
RIGHT-TO-DIE MOVEMENT IN THE
1990S AND THAT IMPROVEMENTS IN
END-OF-LIFE CARE HAVE EASED
AMERICANS' CONCERNS OVER
SUFFERING AT DEATH.
>> I CAN'T EVEN TELL YOU THE
AMOUNT OF RELIEF IT PROVIDES ME.
BUT HE SAYS BRITTANY MAYNARD'S
CASE MAY PROVIDE NEW MOMENTUM
FOR SUPPORTERS OF ASSISTED
SUICIDE.
>> I THINK SHE'S SHIFTING THE
POLITICS IN A WAY THAT WE MAY
SEE SOME OF THE FOLKS WHO GOT
TIED UP IN SAY, TRYING TO
BROADEN MARRIAGE LAWS AND TRYING
TO SEE HOMOSEXUALITY GAIN WIDER
ACCEPTANCE MOVE TO SAY THIS IS A
CHOICE I WANT.
THIS IS SOMETHING I CARE ABOUT
BECAUSE IT'S HER.
>> Reporter: ON MAY 4, 2012, PAM
AND BEN WALD GATHERED THEIR
CLOSEST FRIENDS IN THE LIVING
ROOM.
THEY SANG SONGS TOGETHER, AND
AFTERWARD, IN THE BEDROOM THEY
SHARED, PAM HANDED BEN THE
MEDICATION THAT WOULD END HIS
LIFE.
HE TOOK IT WITHOUT HESITATING.
>> EARLY ON WHEN I GOT TOGETHER
WITH MY HUSBAND AND WE WERE
FIRST TOGETHER, WE'D BE LAYING
IN BED TOGETHER AND HE WAS
THINKING, HE'D GO LIKE THIS WITH
HIS HANDS.
HIS HANDS WERE ALWAYS MOVING.
IT'S KIND OF LIKE, IT'S WHEN HE
WAS THINKING KIND OF THING AND
EVERYTHING.
BUT WHAT I'VE NEVER FORGOTTEN IS
HIS HANDS WERE LIKE THIS ON HIS
CHEST, AND I HELD MY HANDS ON
TOP OF HIS.
BUT HIS HANDS NEVER WENT LIKE
THAT AND THEY JUST STAYED,
BECAUSE HE WAS JUST AT PEACE.
AND HIS LAST WORDS WERE, "THANK
YOU."
AND HE DIED IN TWO HOURS.
>> Reporter: BEN WALD WAS 75-
YEARS-OLD.
SO WHAT CAN WE LEARN FROM
OREGON'S EXPERIENCE?
KATRINA HEDBERG OF THE STATE
HEALTH AUTHORITY, WHO'S NEUTRAL
ON THE ISSUE, TRACKS STATISTICS
ON OREGON'S DEATH WITH DIGNITY
LAW.
>> INITIALLY THERE WERE A NUMBER
OF CONCERNS THAT PEOPLE HAD
AROUND WOULD THIS BE
DISPROPORTIONATELY USED BY
PEOPLE WHO WERE DISENFRANCHISED,
SO UNEDUCATED OR PEOPLE WHO
MIGHT HAVE HAD DISABILITIES OR
THOSE KINDS OF THINGS.
AND WE'VE REALLY FOUND THAT THE
PEOPLE WHO ARE PARTICIPATING ARE
PEOPLE WHO REALLY WANT TO
CONTROL THE TIMING AND MANNER
SURROUNDING THEIR DEATH.
>> Reporter: STILL, DR. TOFFLER
SAYS THOSE FINAL MONTHS AND DAYS
SHOULD NEVER BE CUT SHORT, AS HE
LEARNED FROM EXPERIENCE WITH HIS
OWN WIFE.
>> WE WERE MARRIED FOR 40 YEARS.
AND IN THE LAST FIVE YEARS I
THINK WE HAD THE BEST YEARS OF
OUR LIFE, WHEN SHE ACTUALLY HAD
A TERMINAL DIAGNOSIS.
AND I WOULDN'T TRADE THOSE FIVE
YEARS FOR ANYTHING.
>> Reporter: AS FOR PAM, SHE'S
NOW VOLUNTEERING FOR COMPASSION
AND CHOICES, GUIDING OTHER
FAMILIES THROUGH A PROCESS SHE
NOW KNOWS FIRSTHAND.
>> NOBODY WANTS TO TALK ABOUT
DYING AND DEATH.
BUT ONCE WE GET INTO THAT, IT
REALLY BECOMES AN ACT OF LOVE.
IT REALLY DOES.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE OF OUR
COVERAGE ABOUT THE DEBATE
SURROUNDING ASSISTED SUICIDE IN
THE U.S. AND FOR A DEEPER LOOK
AT THE IMPACT OF THE RIGHT-TO-
DIE MOVEMENT, READ OUR
PRODUCER'S NOTEBOOK ONLINE AT
newshour.pbs.org.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO THE
ARTS, AND THE WORKS OF ONE OF
AMERICA'S MOST CELEBRATED
ARTISTS, ALEXANDER CALDER.
WBGH'S ARTS EDITOR JARED BOWEN
SAT DOWN RECENTLY WITH THE CHIEF
CURATOR OF THE PEABODY ESSEX
MUSEUM NEAR BOSTON TO DISCUSS
THE MAN AND HIS CREATIONS.
THE EXHIBIT RUNS TILL JANUARY.
>> THE NOTION THAT YOU COULD
STAND IN FRONT OF SOMETHING AND
WAIT TO SEE IF IT MOVES, HOW IT
MOVES, AUTOMATICALLY SLOWS YOU
DOWN.
IT MEANS YOU HAVE TO TAKE A LOT
OF TIME TO LOOK CAREFULLY.
>> Reporter: BY WORKING IN
MOVEMENT, CALDER NEAR SINGLE-
HANDEDLY CHANGED THE DEFINITION
OF SCULPTURE-REJECTING TRADITION
AND THOSE CARVED MASSES FOR
WHICH HIS OWN PROMINENT FAMILY
OF SCULPTORS WAS KNOWN.
>> CALDER IS ONE OF THESE PEOPLE
WHO WAS IN THE RIGHT PLACE AT
THE RIGHT TIME.
>> Reporter: LYNDA ROSCOE
HARTIGAN HAS OVERSEEN THIS
INSTALLATION OF CALDER'S WORK AT
THE PEABODY ESSEX MUSEUM.
IT TRACES HIS CAREER BEGINNING
WITH HIS SEARCH FOR THE NEW
WHICH TOOK HIM TO PARIS.
THROUGHOUT THE 1920S AND 30S HE
IMMERSED HIMSELF IN THAT CITY'S
AVANT-GARDE GROUP.
>> ALL THIS FERMENT WAS
HAPPENING.
YOU KNOW, HOW DO YOU WRITE
DIFFERENTLY, HOW DO YOU CREATIVE
DIFFERENT KINDS OF MUSIC, HOW DO
YOU CREATIVE A NEW KIND OF ART.
HE REALLY KNEW HOW TO CONNECT
WITH PEOPLE AND REALLY GOT
INVOLVED WITH ARTISTS LIKE
MARCEL DUCHAMP AND MONDRIAN.
>> Reporter: THAT LED TO
CALDER'S LIFELONG FASCINATION
WITH MOVEMENT AND FORM-WHAT MANY
AN OBSERVER HAS DEEMED HIS OWN
BALLETS.
>> WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT HOW A
DANCER MOVES, SO MUCH OF IT IS
ABOUT BALANCE.
ALSO, I THINK WHEN YOU GO
THROUGH THIS EXHIBITION YOU
BEGIN TO SEE THAT THERE ARE
CONVERSATIONS, THERE ARE
PARTNERSHIPS AMONG SOME OF THE
WORKS AND SO, YOU COULD SAY THAT
IT'S LIKE CHOREOGRAPHY.
YOU COULD ALSO SAY IT'S
THEATRICAL BECAUSE ITS
PERFORMATIVE.
>> Reporter: IT CERTAINLY HELPED
THAT THE MATHEMATICALLY-MINDED
CALDER BROUGHT A HEFTY
ENGINEERING PROWESS TO HIS
CONNECTICUT STUDIO WHERE HE MADE
ALL OF HIS OWN PIECES USING
SIMPLE HAND TOOLS.
>> HE HAD A DEGREE IN MECHANICAL
ENGINEERING.
WHERE YOU WOULD ATTACH WEIGHT OR
RELEASE WEIGHT, HOW FAR YOU CAN
EXTEND BEFORE IT GOES WOPPY-
JAWED IN A WAY THAT YOU DON'T
WANT.
SOPHISTICATED YET SIMPLE AND
BASIC PRINCIPLES OF PHYSICS.
>> Reporter: ALONG WITH A VERY
LIMITED COLOR PALETTE.
CALDER LOVED BLACK AND WHITE,
HARTIGAN SAYS FOR IT'S IMPACT
AND CONTRAST.
ALTHOUGH THE SHOW IS PUNCTUATED
WITH COLOR.
>> RED IS THE COLOR HE FELT
COULD REALLY STAND UP TO THE
BLACK AND WHITE.
YELLOW AND BLUE, THE OTHER TWO
PRIMARIES, BECOME THE COLORS HE
THOUGHT HAD GOOD ACCENT POINTS.
APPARENTLY, ABSOLUTELY DETESTED
THE COLOR GREEN.
>> Reporter: THROUGHOUT HIS
LIFETIME, CALDER REMAINED A
HUGELY POPULAR ARTIST.
HE BEGAN MAKING LARGE-SCALE
PUBLIC ART-INTERACTING WITH
AUDIENCES JUST AS HIS MOBILES
AND STABILES HAD, BUT IN A GRAND
WAY.
>> HE REALLY FELT LIKE HE COULD
MAKE LARGE OUTDOOR SCULPTURE
THAT COULD ENGAGE PEOPLE'S
APPRECIATION OF SPACE AND
ARCHITECTURE, THAT THAT COULD
ENHANCE THEIR LIVES.
>> Reporter: CALDER DIED IN
1976.
HIS WORK HAS BEEN MUCH DEBATED
IN THE INTERVENING YEARS WITH
CRITICS TARGETING HIM PERHAPS
BECAUSE OF HIS POPULARITY.
BUT HARTIGAN SAYS NEARLY 40
YEARS AFTER CALDER'S DEATH,
THERE'S NO QUESTION THAT HE
REMAINS ONE OF THE 20TH
CENTURY'S MOST PROFOUND
CREATORS.
>> THE REASON FOR HIS POPULARITY
IS ALSO THE REASON FOR HIS
ACTUAL SUCCESS AS AN ARTIST
BECAUSE HE WAS SO COMMITTED TO
CHANGE.
I MEAN, YOU CANNOT ENGAGE WITH
SPACE NOW WITHOUT UNDERSTANDING
WITH WHAT HE'S HELPED US
INTERACT WITH AS SCULPTURE.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS WEEK MARKED
THE SECOND ANNIVERSARY OF
HURRICANE SANDY.
AND HERE IN NEW YORK CITY THE
RECOVERY HAS BEEN VERY UNEVEN
IT'S SOMETHING THAT PHOTOGRAPHER
NATHAN KENSINGER HAS DOCUMENTED
IN A SERIES OF PHOTO ESSAYS FOR
THE WEBSITE CURBED.
IN THIS WATERFRONT COMMUNITY IN
SOUTHERN QUEENS, FLOODING CAUSED
A FIRE THAT BURNED MORE THAN 100
HOMES.
>> AND IT WAS KIND OF A
WASTELAND, IT HAD REALLY JUST
BURNED OUT A HUGE SECTION OF
THIS NEIGHBORHOOD ALL AROUND
YOU, YOU WERE SURROUNDED JUST BY
THE SMOKING REMAINS OF THESE
HOMES THAT HAD BEEN COMPLETELY
DESTROYED BY THE STORM.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS IS WHAT IT
LOOKED LIKE A YEAR AGO.
AND THIS IS WHAT IT LOOKS LIKE
TODAY.
>> IT WAS A SHOCK TO SEE HOW
MUCH THEY HAD REBUILT, IT WAS
PRETTY AMAZING TO SEE.
IT HAD GONE FROM BEING
COMPLETELY BURN OUT AND NOTHING
THERE TO ROW UPON ROW OF HOUSES.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT SEVERAL
OTHER SHORE COMMUNITIES HERE IN
STATEN ISLAND HAVE GONE IN THE
OPPOSITE DIRECTION.
RIGHT AFTER THE STORM, KENSINGER
MET JEAN LAURIE.
>> HER HOUSE HAD BEEN VERY
DAMAGED BY THE STORM, BUT SHE
HAD SET UP OUT FRONT OF HER HOME
THIS WHOLE STATION TO HELP GIVE
PEOPLE FOOD AND WATER AND WARM
CLOTHES.
SHE REALLY WANTED TO BRING HER
NEIGHBORHOOD BACK, EVEN THOUGH
SANDY HAD JUST HAPPENED.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT TWO YEARS
LATER HER HOME SITE IS NOTHING
BUT THIS PATCH OF GRASS AND
DIRT.
THE STATE OFFERED HER AND OTHER
HOMEOWNERS THE PRE-STORM VALUE
OF THEIR HOME, PLUS A 5% TO 10%
INCENTIVE, WITH THE IDEA THAT
THE AREA WOULD BE CONVERTED TO A
NATURAL BUFFER ZONE AGAINST
FUTURE STORMS.
JEAN LAURIE ACCEPTED THE OFFER.
KENSINGER HAS DOCUMENTED THAT
WHILE SOME NEW YORKERS WHO LIVE
BY THE SHORE HAVE MOVED AWAY
FROM THE WATER THAT DID THEM
SUCH HARM, NOT EVERYONE HAS.
>> GEOGRAPHICALLY THEY ARE ALL
RIGHT THERE ON THE WATER, THE
AND THEY'RE GOING TO FLOOD
AGAIN.
AND SO SOME OF THEM HAVE CHOSEN
TO COME BACK AND FACE THAT, AND
SOME OF THEM, YOU KNOW, THE
DECISION WAS LIKE, YOU KNOW, WE
CAN'T LIVE HERE ANYMORE.
WE KNOW WE'RE GOING TO FLOOD
SOON AND WE DON'T WANT TO FACE
THAT AGAIN.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
TWO DAYS BEFORE THE MIDTERM
ELECTIONS POLLS SHOW
REPUBLICANS LEADING IN MOST OF
THE HEAVILY CONTESTED ELECTIONS
THAT WILL CONTROL THE U.S.
SENATE.
AND BERNARD MAYS, WHO STARTED
THE NATION'S FIRST SUICIDE
HOTLINE IN 1961, HAS DIED.
HE SAID, "WHAT WAS NEEDED WAS
A COMPASSIONATE EAR, SOMEONE TO
TALK TO."
MAYS, ALSO THE FOUNDING
CHAIRMAN OF NATIONAL PUBLIC
RADIO, WAS 85.
THAT'S IT FOR TONIGHT.
I HOPE YOU'LL JOIN US ON AIR AND
ONLINE TOMORROW.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, GOOD
NIGHT.